.TH D22_MODULES 5  "17 May 2024" "\e0" "GUTS"
.SH NAME
d22 modules \- Module files used by the d22 build utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/d22/modules/*
.br
.B ~/.d22/modules/*
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The files contained under the \fB/etc/d22/modules/\fR and \fI$HOME\fR\fB/.d22/modules/\fR
directories are used to provide aditional functionality to, or modify the existing
functionality of, the \fBd22(1)\fR build utility.
.LP
d22 uses two types of modules:
.LP
.B Language Modules
.br
.RS 2
Language modules provide special, language-specific features. They have file names of
\fIlang_<name>\fR, where \fIname\fR is the name of the module. They should be set by a
project's build script, when it is first loaded, using the \fI$LANG_MOD\fR variable.
.RE
.LP
.B Shell Modules
.br
.RS 2
Shell modules are intended to enhance the functionality of d22 by replacing, or extending
the existing POSIX shell implementations of various functions with implementations that
take advantage of the features provided by more advanced, feature-rich shells, such as
ksh, bash, and zsh.
.RE
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
.SS Language Module Definitions
Language modules should be written under the same constraints as the main d22 script.
They should rely only on shell features which are defined by the POSIX standard, or on
the functions provided by d22 itself. The use of any non-standard functionality could
break compatibility in some environments.
.LP
Language modules currently expect the following functions to be defined:
.LP
.I __auto_dependency \fB[SOURCE] [OBJECT]\fR
.RS 2
This function is called before the file \fBSOURCE\fR is compiled to the file \fBOBJECT\fR.
It is expected to read \fBSOURCE\fR and determine if there are any additional files which
should be checked for changes before proceeding to compile \fBOBJECT\fR, and add them to
the dependencies for \fBOBJECT\fR using \fIadd_object_dependency\fR (See
\fBd22(1)\fR).
.RE
.LP
.SS Shell Module Definitions
Shell module support will be added in a later update.
.LP
.SH ALSO SEE
.I d22(1)
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
Both
.BR d22 ,
and this manual page, are written and maintained by T. I. "Luna" Ericson.
